---
title: "Kanga: My design system"
introduction: 
date: 2024-06-16
created: 2024-04-03
tags:
- this website
revision: 3
status: 1
cover: /images/kanga.jpg
summary: 'I built some documentation for my design system.'
---
Back in the old days of the internet, Brad Frost wrote an article, "[Atomic Web Design](https://bradfrost.com/blog/post/atomic-web-design/)," in which he gives name to the concept of building webpages from reusable elements. Since then, design systems that start by defining base elements and successively add complexity have become ubiquitous. 

I built this site by following the "atomic" philosophy. Recently, though, I've found it tricky to make minor updates. My site uses Nunjucks and Less — and I'd built in *extensibility* in my components so they could be used in any context. However, my hygiene standards slipped with successive updates, resulting in some components tightly coupled to their context. Worse still, I couldn't remember how to use the various options I'd built into my Nunjucks Macros.

After some cleanup, my solution to ensuring hygiene in the future was to create documentation for my patterns and components. I'm nominally calling this a *design system*, which I called "Kanga" for (hopefully) obvious reasons.

<figure url='/images/kanga.jpg' caption='Kanga is the name of my design system; it’s also the name of my design system’s mascot.' classes='shadow'>


## Building design system docs
I use [Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) as the templating language on this site. There are, of course, other options, but I find template inheritance and macro functionality lend themselves to "atomic" design structures.

Similarly, Nunjucks encourages *layouts* and *includes* (aka components) to spit code into separate concerns. 

The [GOV.UK Design System](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/) inspired me when deciding how to document my system's elements. I like their use of standalone examples. Following this pattern forced me to ensure all my components are context agnostic.

I build a [component to show standalone examples](/kanga/components/example/) in an `iframe`. The component also extracts the code if it's one of the supported filetypes (currently Nunjucks and Markdown), strips out any frontmatter and renders it in a `details` element. 

