---
title: If you’re fond of sand dunes and salty air
introduction: Exploring odd bits and bobs on the Isle of Wight.
date: 2024-08-16
cover: /images/articles/isle-of-wight-2024/cover.jpeg
status: 2
tags:
- family
- trips
---
Back in the day, the Solent—the five-mile-wide sea separating England from the Isle of Wight—wasn't quite so grand. Thousands of years ago, it was a [little river with big ambitions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/River_Solent). I'll bet it never imagined that in the space of an ice age, tourists would be steaming across its waters in a medium-sized car ferry.

In Portsmouth, we squeezed onto the back of the MV St Faith. She's Wightlink's oldest—some might say grandest—ship[^ship]. Despite the many signs alerting passengers to _"please turn off your car alarm"_, we were accompanied on our crossing by a surprising chorus of beeps, boops and nee-nors. The expensive-looking houses in Fishbourn had their view immeasurably improved by our arrival; who wouldn't want to see the rusted hulk of a 30-year-old ferry out of their kitchen window?

<figure url="/images/articles/isle-of-wight-2024/IsleOfWightFromTheISS.jpg" caption="The Isle of Wight taken by astronaut Chris Hadfield from the International Space Station. You can see how the extinct river Solent became the Solent channel as the sea level rose." classes="wide">

## Treacherous waters and weird creatures

The Isle of Wight separated from the mainland about 125,000 years ago[^age] when sea levels rose, giving ferry operators the right horn. Since then, humans have been crashing their ships into the surrounding rocks. [The Shipwreck Museum](https://museum.maritimearchaeologytrust.org/) in Arreton is stuffed to the portholes with all kinds of shit from multiple maritime mishaps. 

Alongside the bells and bits of old boats is one odd little object that scared the children. It's a [Feejee mermaid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiji_mermaid)—a half-monkey half-fish made famous by P.T. Barnum's circus. It was sewen together by the Victorians who loved anything bizarre. With the body of a baby monkey, a fish's tail and a demon's lips — this thing is the stuff of nightmares. I loved it.

<figure url="/images/articles/isle-of-wight-2024/feejee.jpeg" caption="The mermaid—or, more accurately, merman—at the Shipwreck museum; its grotesque mouth twisted into a smile. I swear it moved.">

## The park that's disappearing into the sea
We spent a _lot_ of time at Blackgang Chine. So much time that I swear I saw part of the land slowly eroding into the sea below the dizzying cliffs. This part of the island is mainly formed of Gault, a bluish-black clay laid down during the Lower Cretaceous period. It turns out that Gault is brilliant for preserving long-dead sea creatures[^fossils] but an absolute bugger if you want to build a theme park.

As Britain's oldest theme park, Blackgang Chine has been gradually crumbling into the sea for 181 years. A fact that must've escaped its founder, Alexander Dabell, who brought the land in 1842. He attracted visitors by building a complex series of steps and paths down to the beach below the cliffs. He also brought a rotten whale carcass that he displayed to Queen Victoria, but that's another story.  

Nothing remains of the path to the beach today, or indeed, many of the other attractions. The orriginal Cowboy Town, for example, fell off ‘80s. The whale's still there, though, minus the bit they hacked off because the queen hit her head on it.

Blackgang's eccentric and varied history makes it well worth a visit. If nothing else, come for the views. You can enjoy the vista east to the Needles on a clear day. 

There's also the chance to spot attractions past mixed in with modern-day additions. Restricted Area 5 has many impressive animatronic dinosaurs, but our kids love climbing on the ‘70s originals. Or the "mouth of hell", another 1970's orriginal that has returned to the park in recent years; genuinely terrifying but somehow weirdly fascinating.

Isle of Wight Guru has an [excellent blog post on the history of Blackgang Chine](https://www.isleofwightguru.co.uk/blog/blackgang-chine-a-not-very-brief-history).

::: .gallery
<figure url="/images/articles/isle-of-wight-2024/cover.jpeg" caption="Katie, enjoying the spectacular view from Blackgang Chine.">

<figure url="/images/articles/isle-of-wight-2024/mouth-of-hell.jpeg" caption="Rootwo sticks his head out of the eye of the mouth of hell.">
:::


[^ship]: Ship or boat? [It's unclear what to call a cross-Solent ferry](https://www.dictionary.com/e/boat-vs-ship/).
[^age]: I read a variety of estimates of when sea levels rose enough to separate the island from the mainland, ranging from over a million to just a few thousand years. [Wikipedia reckons 125,000 years](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isle_of_Wight#Geology), so that's good enough for me.
[^fossils]: The [Dinosaur Isle Museum](https://www.dinosaurisle.com/) in Sandown has a brilliant display of fossils. Huge Ammonites, as big as an adult's head, lived in the sea millions of years ago. When they died (or got eaten), the Gault consumed their shells—eventually turning them into rock.